Scoping out the tensor and wormhole take it away. Peter, okay. Okay, so I'm holding here the 10th torrent and 300 s that I purchased from 10s torrents online store. And if you like what you hear in this talk and in the next talk, you can go to the store and buy your own wormhole card. There are a bunch of other form factors in that store as well. But this is not a sales talk, it's a fusem talk. I we're here to talk about open source software. So point 110 to make a open source software stack for that hardware, and all of that the hardware is up on GitHub. You can go and find it. It's all great, but I don't want to talk about software. I want to talk about hardware because I believe that good software developers need to really understand the hardware on which they are running. So I'm going to tell you all about the hardware here, and then you can either think about what the software should be, or better understand why the current software is the way it is. Now, I don't want to take my card apart because I paid good money for it, but if you did take off the case and the heat sink in the pan, you would see this photo here. But I'm not talking to talk about PCBs, because I don't do PCBs. So we're going to switch to this much simpler block diagram here. So on the bottom, we've got a psi Express thingy. On the left, we've got two QCP cages, and then two proprietary Ethernet ports on the top, and then in the middle of the card, we've got these two wormhole chips, each flanked by a bunch of DRAM now, if I shovel things around just a little bit, I can show you how everything is wired together. There we go. So I've drawn three types of connection here. Each green line is representing DRAM the red line is representing psi Express, and each blue line is representing bi directional 100 gigabit Ethernet. Now, in theory, each one model chip can drive 16 ports of that 100 giga bit Ethernet. But the form factor of this particular board only gives you eight ports of Ethernet on the left chip and four ports of ethne on the right chip, which is good, but it could be better. But in any event, the scale up factor here the scale up sorry, here is Ethernet. At some point, your AI model is going to get larger and larger, and you're going to get too large for a single chip. Even if your single chip was like the whole size of a whole wafer, sweet brush, you will still need multiple chips at some point. So the hope is you can buy as many chips as you need and then link them together with point to point. If that in whatever topology makes sense for you. Is that what I want to say here? I think so, yep. Okay. So, however, if you scale out too much, then giving each chip its own psi Express connection is going to get a little bit pricey. So the hope is that we can get away with giving only some chips a psi Express connection and relying on Ethernet to reach the other chips. And this board is designed to give you a little taste of that. So as you can see, the chip on the left here has a psi Express connection, but the chip on the right does not, so it is only reachable via that Ethernet link printed onto the circuit board here. So from a software point of view, this means that you can M up memory from the left chip. You can't M up memory from the right chip. Implications for software that I'm just going to leave that sentence there and move swiftly on. So if we zoom in to one of these chips, here, we see a 10 by 12 grid of tiles. I've got various types of interface tile around the edge. We've got Ethernet tiles left and right, DRAM tiles top and bottom, and then also on the bottom, one PCI Express tile and one arc tile. Now on the form factor of this particular board, two columns of compute tile, which is all this stuff in the middle, are disabled for yield reasons. So I'm just gonna mark two columns here. I can have randomly chosen two columns, but it will it will vary from chip to chip just based on the yield of where the defects are on these tiles. If you buy other form factors, you can get more compute tiles. If you buy an n1 50 s board, which I think someone has at the back here, you get two tiles. And if you buy a galaxy system, you get all 80 compute tiles on every chip. They've saved the really good yielding chips for that particular product, which will cost you lots of money, because people have to make some money, OK. So what's next? Yep. So I've numbered each DRAM chip, each DRAM tile based on the DRAM module that connects to I've numbered each Ethernet tile individually because point to point ethne links are unique. I've not numbered any of the other tiles because all the compute tiles are identical to each other. Now, before we delve into the various types of tile here, I'd like to talk about the memory hierarchy. Well, more to the point, the lack of a. Memory hierarchy. So on most GPUs, if you get one today, you'll have a single address space that spans the entire chip, kind of covering everything from the compute to the memory, and you'll have various layers of caches in between the compute and the memory. But we have none of that here, no hierarchy of memory, no caches, and instead, each tile has its own address space, and if you're running code on one of these tiles, then you can only access the memory of the local Tile, so your load and store instructions can only access the local Tile. But of course, we need some way to move to move things around further than just a single tile, otherwise life would be incredibly boring, so that's where the network on chip comes in. Now before I can add that network to this diagram, I need to make some space. So I'm going to get rid of the external things here and shuffles around from the physical grid to the logical grid. So all the same tiles, but we're just now viewing them in a slightly changed way. And now I can add the network on chip or knock to the diagram here. So this is all of these purple arrows, and that this links every tile to every other tile in a 2d torus. So if you go off the right edge, you end up on the left edge. If you go off the top edge, you end up on the bottom edge here. And each knock transaction, so any tile can initiate a NOC transaction, and each transaction is effectively an asynchronous mem copy. Now I've put the conceptual API for this on the site. Here you choose two tiles by giving the x and y coordinates in the tile grid, and you copy some bytes from the other space of one tile to the other space of the other and in most cases, that the tile that is that is causing this transaction to happen will be either the source or the DST. But you can do more exotic things, if you so wish. Now I should also mention that each NOC transaction has some overhead to it. So for kind of peak, peak performance, the transfer size, the number of bytes, wants to be in the range of, like one to eight kilobytes, which, if we used to the N video world is sound like quite a lot. So kind of quick change over to the, you know, the cooler world. In that world, you're kind of thinking like 128 bytes. It's a kind of like transfer size, because in that world, you have 32 threads in a warp, and each thread issues a four byte load, and the hardware will coalesce all of that into units of 128 bytes. But switching back to this tip here, we have none of that. We have no CO best thing of memory. You know, you have one thread, and you issue a single large 1d mem copy, which is a little bit limiting, but hopefully not too so also limiting is that we can only move rightwards and upwards on this particular network. But for that problem, we have a very simple solution, which is, there is a second network on chip that is identical in every way because all of the arrows go in the other direction. So this guy can go left and down, and again, it's a 2d torus. If you go off the far left, you end up on the far right. If you go off the far bottom, you end up on the far top. And both of these networks, in addition to doing plain copiers, can do multicast and they can do atomics. And all three of these things, plain copiers, multicast and atomics are naturally asynchronous, so you fire them off, and then if you care about whether they complete, and you can then you can poll to ask whether they have yet completed. And this is the second major difference to the usual GPU model, in that if you need to hide any latency i of memory, then you are using asynchronous APIs to do that. There is no automatic context switching between multiple warps. So again, another major thing to bear in mind there. So you're going to want to hear about these various types of tile, and obviously the compute ones are where the magic really happens. But we're going to keep you waiting just a little bit and look at every other type of tile first. So, so looking at the arc tile first. This guy is boring, but it has to be there to power thermal clock and reset management things that have to happen somewhere, but you don't really have to care about what they really are. So code for this particular tile is currently closed source. It's not really a problem, because you can basically forget about that this tile is even there, other than if you need to reset the board or change the clock speed. So we can move swiftly on to a more interesting type of tile. So DRAM tiles. Each DRAM tile is a bridge between the network on chip, drawn here in purple and in teal. And a DRAM module. Each DRAM module is having two gigs of GDR, six. And these tiles cannot initiate, not transactions of their own, but you can read or write from them, from other tiles using a not read or write. And if you do do that, then the address space of these tiles is extremely simple. Well, the first one gig is the first one gig channel, the second one gig is the second one gig channel. And the rest of the address space here is enough. So these guys where you're storing all of your large matrices, if we move on again, we reach the psi e x the psi e tile. So this guy is a bridge between the network on chip, again, in purple and in teal, and the host address space. So if the host system issues a read or write against the board, this tile will translate that psi Express read or write into a knock read or write against the address space of some other tile. And we've got a 496, megabyte aperture for that purpose, broken up into a number of regions, and each region can be mapped to a sum per tile address space, depending on where you want to map them to, going the other way. If some other tile issues a read or write against this tile using the unknock this tile will translate it to a psi Express reader. Write against pin physical host memory. And if we're using one gig huge pages, you can pin four of them to get a four gigabyte aperture going in that direction. So moving on again, we finally reach something particularly interesting. So this is an Ethernet tile, and at the top there we have a programmable risk five core, which is what makes this guy interesting. So this is the RV 32 im instruction set. So we've got some integer GPRS there, 32 bits wide, and a 32 bit program counter, and it can do all the usual risk five things. We've got a integer ALU there. We can do control flow with branching and calling, and we've got a little load story unit, and then a number of things on the memory bus which can be accessed by that load store unit. So you've got a block of s fan there in pink that holds all the code and data for this, this risk five core. And then on the left of s fan, we have two NOC interface units, or niu's, and these are how the risk five talks to the knock so these guys can either initiate knock transactions of their own, or they can service transactions which have been initiated by other tiles. So if you are running code on this risk five and you want to initiate a knock transaction, then you take the arguments for the asynchronous mem copy, you put them into some memory maps registers on this store unit, and then you write a go signal again with twin memory match register. And if you care whether the thing has completed yet again, you can read from a memory maps register to find out whether things have finished. So if you are used to doing any kind of like low level like driver Dev, then this pattern should be familiar to if not, you can wrap it up in a nice API to hide all of the finicky little details. Now, on the other side of SRAM, we have two other units. We have the Ethernet transmit unit and the Ethernet receive unit, and this per unit is again an asynchronous mem copy thing. So it can do a asynchronous mem copy, albeit only from the ether tile. That is the source here to some other ether tile. So you know, data can flow from the s frame in this tile through the ether transmit unit over a point to pointer, ethne, link to some other Ethernet tile, through that tiles, RX unit and into that other tiles, RAM, and the sender will specify the destination address to write to. Hence why we've not had to put the receive unit on the memory bus here. I should also say that if the Ethernet link flaps, then the risk five is responsible for noticing this and retraining the ether link. And again, there's a tiny little bit of a closed source firmware for doing that retraining should you need to, which is unfortunate, but it is what it is time. So moving on again, we reach what we are actually kind of properly interested in. So this is a compute tile somewhat similar to what we just saw orbit, with five, risk five cores up there rather than just one. Again, it's RB, 32 im instruction set on each, and one bare metal thread running on each so again, it is one thread per RISC, five core. And if you want to hide any latency, then you are using asynchronous APIs to do so. There is no automatic context switching between multiple threads. Yeah, okay. So again, on the left one, we have two nius, just as previously, and then a huge block of ram here. We've got more RAM here than on the previous tile. So the ether tiles had 256k of RAM on them. These guys have a Meg and a half, but it serves the same role. It holds, holds all of the code and the data for these five. Risk five. Of course, and then the majority of the tile on the right is taken up by this 10 six coprocessor, which is where the magic really happens. Now I've drawn it on the general memory bus here, but in practice, only the three risk fives on the right can meaningfully talk to it, which leads to a very natural division of labor where the three risk fives on the right, drive the coprocessor, leaving the two with fives on the left to drive the two nius, and then they can all communicate through SRAM to share things. So obviously we need to zoom into this guy, because this is where the magic really happens. And there we go. So I've drawn kind of front end type bits in green, back end type bits in brown, memories in pink, and instruction arrows in lilac, if the lilac has come out on the slide set. So at the top end, we've got three instruction FIFOs. FIFO being another word for Q, if that's not a term that's familiar team, and there's no kind of real like control flow in the front end here. If there is any control flow, which there will be, then the RISC five cores to now have zoomed out, they will resolve all of the control flow that you have. And then each RISC five will push a stream of 10 six instructions into one of these FIFOs, and we've got three FIFOs here, hence why only three risk fives can meaningfully talk to this thing and then. So there are two ways to push instructions into these FIFOs. The first one, you'll probably guess, based on the theme of what I've been saying, is that you can do memory mapped writes to some memory mapped register to write into these FIFOs. You'll be pushing a lot of 10, six instructions into this guy to do the real work. So there's a second, cheaper way to push things in which requires a quick diversion into RISC five. So if you're familiar with RISC five, you should know that three quarters of the opcode space is reserved for the RVC extension, but none of these calls infinitely RVC extension, which leaves that three quarters of the opcode space available for other use, so it gets repurposed, and if any of these Risk five cores are given an instruction in the RBC op code space. They will not treat it as a RBC instruction. They will instead treat it as a opaque 32 bit value to push onto the FIFO attached to that core. So whichever way we've pushed things into these FIFOs, if we then look down, we get to the next unit, which are these macro expanders, which are configurable units that allow one instruction to expand out to several. And if you configure and use these guys properly, then you can keep the back end of the 10 six unit fully saturated. Only need to issue kind of one instruction every kind of 10 cycles or so from the risk five, because you can expand out one to 10 on average, which frees up the risk five to do other things, such as resolving all of the control flow, stopping down again. The next unit here is the synchronization unit, and it contains, well, it gets three streams of instructions flowing in from the top, and it then Muxes now to the various back end units underneath, and it contains the mutexes and semaphores to control the relative order of things between these three streams, which we're going to want to use, because the various backend units here are shared between the three incoming streams, both their execution units and the registers in all of them, which is a little punchy. Okay, fine. I will therefore give you very briefly on all of the units here. Unpack on the left to move stuff from SRAM into the unit. We've got map models on the middle unit there. That map models really happen? FP, eight at full rate, or bf 16 at half rate, well, BF, 16 ish at half rate, it's a little weird. FP 16 ish at quarter rate. And then you can push your data back out from your pack unit, back out to SRAM after you finish working with it. And then all of the config on the side, you can either drive from memory, map writes the risk fives, or from the Scale Unit on which is there to help you drive all of this conflict. I'm told, I'm out of time, so that'll have to do that. And you can then zoom out, and we are back to where we started with this nice photo. Give him a round of applause, and just like the previous speakers, I'm going to kick peter out over there so you can go find him if you have some more questions about his presentation. Martin, there you are. 
